[DOC] Add "how-to" guide for creating a manifest file (#528)
nipoppy/nipoppy: docs/source/how_to_guides/manifest/index.md

The term "visit ID", on the other hand, is used to refer to any data collection event (not necessarily imaging-related), and is more common in clinical contexts.

**In most cases, `session_id` and `visit_id` will be identical (or `session_id`s will be a subset of `visit_id`s).**
However, having two descriptors becomes particularly useful when imaging and non-imaging assessments do not use the same naming conventions.
:::

### `datatype`

A list of datatypes expected to be in the {term}`BIDS` data. Should be left empty if no imaging data was collected.
- Example valid values: `['anat']`, `['anat', 'dwi']`

Common {term}`MRI` datatypes include:
- `anat`: anatomical MRI
- `dwi`: diffusion MRI
- `func`: functional MRI
- `fmap`: field maps

The full list of valid datatypes is listed in the [BIDS schema](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/src/schema/objects/datatypes.yaml).

<!-- :::{note}
If it is too difficult to determine the exact imaging datatypes collected for a given participant and session, you can set the `datatype` value for this row to be all available datatypes in the study.

> ::: -->

Author: Unsure if we should include this or not, technically this is a bit of a hack but there are cases where it's really not easy to figure out which datatypes have been collected and I don't think we should make this a major obstacle, especially since the datatype column isn't even used (though we have plans to change that)

## Guidelines and examples for creating a study's manifest file

We **highly recommend** writing a script that automatically generates the manifest based on existing files.
These can be tabular files (CSVs, TSVs, Excel sheets, etc.) and/or imaging data on disk.
The script can be rerun whenever the source files are modified to automatically update the manifest, reducing future manual work and keeping a record of what was done.

Below are some examples from common cases we have encountered.
Note that the example use Python scripts, but other programming languages like R can also be used to generate the manifest.

::::{grid} 1 2 3 3
:::{grid-item-card} Example 1
Creating a manifest from another tabular file for a cross-sectional study

> :::

Author: Example 1 and 3 not written yet, I wanted to see how we feel about having this kind of example

# Creating the manifest file

> This guide shows how to create a dataset's manifest file, which is a list of participants and visits available in the study.

Author: In general I am hesitant to add too many "explanation" things to the how-to guide, since it's supposed to be a short guide for people who want to do a single thing (create the manifest). I would put the whole "capture phase and curation phase" in a separate document, under a new "Explanations" tab. Related: [how-to guides](https://diataxis.fr/how-to-guides/) and [explanations](https://diataxis.fr/explanation/) in diataxis

> This guide shows how to create a dataset's manifest file, which is a list of participants and visits available in the study.

Author: I think that is more of an "Explanations" thing too

> This guide shows how to create a dataset's manifest file, which is a list of participants and visits available in the study.

Author: Changed "available" to expected

> This guide shows how to create a dataset's manifest file, which is a list of participants and visits available in the study.

Author: Added to new Explanations page

> This guide shows how to create a dataset's manifest file, which is a list of participants and visits available in the study.

Author: Added a new Explanations page that kind of goes over this

:::{note}

> If the Nipoppy dataset was initialized from an existing BIDS dataset with `nipoppy init --bids-source`, then a valid and accurate manifest file was automatically generated from the BIDS data. In this case, it is not necessary to manually create or update the manifest file.

Author: Do you have suggested alternative for "accurate"?

> Also this manifest will need an update if there are non-imaging participants / visits.

This is already mentioned in the how-to guide for "init-from-non-bids"

> If the Nipoppy dataset was initialized from an existing BIDS dataset with `nipoppy init --bids-source`, then a valid and accurate manifest file was automatically generated from the BIDS data. In this case, it is not necessary to manually create or update the manifest file.

Author: Removed "accurate"

> If the Nipoppy dataset was initialized from an existing BIDS dataset with `nipoppy init --bids-source`, then a valid and accurate manifest file was automatically generated from the BIDS data. In this case, it is not necessary to manually create or update the manifest file.

Author: Actually no, I like "accurate" in addition to valid because the default sample manifest is already valid...

> If the Nipoppy dataset was initialized from an existing BIDS dataset with `nipoppy init --bids-source`, then a valid and accurate manifest file was automatically generated from the BIDS data. In this case, it is not necessary to manually create or update the manifest file.

Reviewer: How about:

```suggestion
If the Nipoppy dataset was initialized from an existing BIDS dataset with `nipoppy init --bids-source`, then a manifest file containing valid and accurate entries for the imaging data was automatically generated from the BIDS input. In this case, it is not necessary to manually insert or update the imaging data information in the manifest file but only non-imaging data. 
```

> If the Nipoppy dataset was initialized from an existing BIDS dataset with `nipoppy init --bids-source`, then a valid and accurate manifest file was automatically generated from the BIDS data. In this case, it is not necessary to manually create or update the manifest file.

Author: I like this, thanks!

---
class: dropdown
---
:::{literalinclude} ../../../../nipoppy/data/examples/sample_manifest.tsv
---
linenos: True
---
:::
::::

## Columns in the manifest file

:::{attention}
There must be only **one row** per unique `participant_id`/`visit_id` combination.
:::

### `participant_id`

A unique identifier for a participant in the study. Must be present in every row.
- **Cannot** contain non-alphanumeric characters (spaces, dashes, underscores, etc.)
- **Cannot** have the `sub-` prefix
- Example valid values: `001`, `Control1`, `ABC01`
- Example invalid values: `sub-001`, `Control_1`, `ABC.01`

::::{admonition} What if the participant IDs in my existing study files are not Nipoppy-compatible?
---
class: dropdown
---
In those situations, you should still make sure that `participant_id` values in the Nipoppy manifest do not contain non-alphanumeric characters.
To keep track of the mapping between the Nipoppy `participant_id`s and the original study's IDs (which we will refer to as `recruitment_id`), you should create a `recruitment.tsv` file, like so:
:::{csv-table}
---
file: ./inserts/recruitment.tsv
header-rows: 1
delim: tab
---

> :::

Author: I added a new Explanations page that kind of goes over this

::: -->

## Guidelines and examples for creating a study's manifest file

We **highly recommend** writing a script that automatically generates the manifest based on existing files.
These can be tabular files (CSVs, TSVs, Excel sheets, etc.) and/or imaging data on disk.
The script can be rerun whenever the source files are modified to automatically update the manifest, reducing future manual work and keeping a record of what was done.

Below are some examples from common cases we have encountered.
Note that the example use Python scripts, but other programming languages like R can also be used to generate the manifest.

::::{grid} 1 2 3 3
:::{grid-item-card} [Example 1](./example1)
Creating a manifest from another tabular file for a cross-sectional study with different imaging datatypes
:::
:::{grid-item-card} [Example 2](./example2)
Creating a manifest from a wide-form tabular file for a longitudinal study with imaging and non-imaging visits
:::
:::{grid-item-card}  [Example 3](./example3)
Creating a manifest from data directories on disk for a study with different imaging datatypes

> :::

Author: But Example 2 has only a single imaging datatype...
